---
title: Auscert Workshop 2023
menutitle: Auscert 2023
weight: 90
no_menu: true
---

This workshop will take place on the 10th May 2023.

[Full agenda](https://conference.auscert.org.au/sessions/incident-response-with-velociraptor/)

## Incident Response with Velociraptor

With the increased prevalence of CyberCrime in recent years the
likelihood that your organization will be targeted by organized crime
groups has increased dramatically. Professional Cyber criminals are
proficient and agile with typical dwell times measured in hours, not
weeks or months as was common in the past. An unsuccessful incident
response exercise can result in massive losses to the organization
with critical data either ransomed or exfiltrated.

Don’t worry – Velociraptor has your back! This tutorial will introduce
you to this powerful open source framework capable of responding to
many thousands of endpoints within minutes. Velociraptor has come onto
the scene a few years ago and is getting better all the time. It is
now the obvious choice for an open source Digital Forensic and
Incident Response (DFIR) tool.

Velociraptor’s superpower is its flexible and powerful query language
called VQL. Using VQL we can implement novel detection, hunt for
compromise and automate all our response needs. We cover some common
use cases such as hunting for ssh keys across large networks or
automatic escalation when suspicious events are discovered. We also
cover real time monitoring of the endpoint (for example webshell
detection via process parent/child analysis) and how VQL can be used
to build sophisticated alerting around process execution chains,
network connections and even bash instrumentation of the command line,
all done at scale with the click of a few buttons.


<iframe src="https://present.velocidex.com/presentations/2023-auscert/index.html" frameborder="0" width="980px" height="600px" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe>

[Full Screen](https://present.velocidex.com/presentations/2023-auscert/index.html)
